I'm sitting in the beautiful sunroom at 305 East
Brookside in Bryan with Lannis Hope, a long-time
faculty colleague. Now we're going to stop and be
sure the machine is working. And didn't get it on
there that this is October 12. Lannis, would you
give us a brief biographical background before we
chat about your years here as a member of the
faculty and the staff. Okay, I was born out in West
Texas in Motley County, a little town called
Roaring Springs.
My father was a farmer and he had worked as a cowhand
for the Matador Ranch in that county there. But his
father had a good bit of land and had come from
southern parts of Texas and earlier his father, my
grandfather, had run away from home in Tennessee
and came to Texas and was working in the cotton
field south of Dallas. at age 14, when he finally
got married to my grandmother there in those
counties south of Dallas in Waxahachie. But
ultimately, they came out to West Texas. They were
still farming out there. And I was born there in
1921. But shortly, my father left the farm and went
to work for the railroad for the rest of his life.
And I grew up with my five brothers and sisters in
the town of Slaton, Texas, just about 15 miles
outside of Lubbock, now a bedroom community for
Lubbock. And went to high school there with the
exception of my last year in high school when I went
away from home and went and lived with a
schoolteacher in Borger, Texas. The school
teacher was a sort of a mentor for me and I was his
live-in babysitter for his family for my last
year. Then I went to Texas Tech for one year and at
the end of that year the shadows of World War II were
long and so I joined the National Guard to be
mobilized as federal troops in 1940. five years in
the service, and I came out and in the process I met
my wife, married her, went overseas for two years
in the European theater. Came home and spent about
a year in business with my father-in-law, and then
decided I'd go back to college and make a school
teacher.
Went to Texas Tech at Lubbock, my hometown,
essentially. And finished my degree and started
teaching in the Lubbock public schools. But then a
set of circumstances caused me to decide to go on to
graduate school. And I went to graduate school and
took a psychology, counseling psychology major
at the University of Texas. After that, I worked
for Baylor for 10 years as assistant dean of men.
And I came to A&M in 1961. Been there ever since.
Describe the process of you and A&M meshing. How
did you know there was a vacancy? Who recruited
you? Well, Austin Curley recruited me. Actually,
he recruited me the year before I came. And I was ABD
at Texas, and I decided I wouldn't take another job
until I finished the dissertation. So the next
year when I'd finished, the position was still
open at A&M as a counselor. And
so I took it the second time around. At that time,
counselors in the Counseling Center had academic
rank. And I taught one course. In the Department
of? In the Department of Education. And then the
Department of Education and Psychology. They put
both names in there at the time. That's another
story.
So they made me assistant professor in education
and a counselor in the Counseling and Testing
Center. We had offices in Old Aggieland Inn. First
two floors, I think. Which, just tell us. until
west of Spiesa Dining Hall, about a five, six story
building. The top floors were unused because they
were not inhabitable. And it was the, I guess you'd
say it was the student center before the present.
at the center of Loganville in about 1952. It had
once been a kind of an overnight hotel, had it not?
It was a hotel, in every sense of the word. And many
parents of the students I counseled would come in
to see me there and say, I spent my first wedding
night here, or whatever else like that. And they
remembered it as the MSC. Describe your duties in
that new job. I was counseling, mostly academic
and vocational counseling for six, seven
thousand male students that came to A&M at the
time. There was, there were two other half-time
counselors and a couple of people who were
involved in teaching courses.
The Counseling Center was charged with teaching
what they call basic courses. These were left over
from the old basic division. And they gave
academic credit for taking a course in vocational
guidance or a course in personal development or a
course in architecture, anything introductory
type of courses. So I'd end up teaching some of
those courses and how to study and how to pass
courses and stuff like that. And along with
teaching a straight academic course over in the
education department, I taught child psychology
and adolescent psychology over there. So did you
teach two courses every semester? No, one course
every semester. One academic course, three hour,
plus I would take another of the one hour basic
courses. By and large, what were you primarily
counseling these students about? Mostly career
choice. However, because I was the only PhD level
counselor, I ended up with all of the personal
counseling cases at that time. And I was hired
mostly to do that kind of thing. I also visited the
hospital daily for the people who had breakdowns
and whatever at the hospital. And I would go over
there and check with those people who had been
hospitalized every day. Describe the range of the
kinds of, and in general, can you give any examples
of some of the most typical
counseling problems? Well, a lot of people came
for careers. And their problem with careers
mostly was the same ones we have today. in that they
find themselves signed up for a career which is
inappropriate to their interests. It may be
because their sweetheart or their father or their
doctor or their pastor sort of influenced them to
choose this career, and they were having trouble
changing their mind and getting out of it. And also
about that time, research had been published
which indicated that rarely were 18- and
19-year-olds mature enough to make a final
decision. So they had a perfectly sound basis for
their indecision. And it was just a matter of
getting through there. I counseled quite a few
corps. Of course, it was all corps the first year or
two I came. Everybody except transfer students
were in corps. About 5,000, I would guess,
something like that. And I was a a listening ear for
a lot of trouble, some of them inconsequential,
some of them pretty consequential, about how to
get along in the Corps and how to get along with
their buddies and what to do and what not to do and
stuff like that. And I guess one of the really
puzzlers for me was one cadet who was on the
military scholarship and was deep into Corps
activities, which involved a lot of the what was
then called hazy, and they said, man, I want to be in
the Army, but this is not what I thought the Army was
like. And so I had to bring them around to some
adjustment to the, either realizing that they
couldn't put up with this or else they had to put up
with it until they get through and the real Army
wouldn't be like this quite. A lot of those things
varied back and forth there. A lot of boy-girl
problems. Of course, the girls weren't here, but
the more girl problems were there nevertheless.
You didn't mention financial problems. Didn't
have too much to do with financial at that time. Oh,
okay. We didn't have the, A&M didn't have the vast
amount of student aid on the books at that time.
that they have now. And so people came, they were
pretty much on their own. They had to do it. There
wasn't a matter of finding university funds or
scholarship funds or stuff like that. Can you
share some general anecdotes about examples of
some unusual situations you worked on? Of course,
mentioning no names. Oh, I think of one, a
counselee I saw a half dozen times.
he got out a pencil and a pad of paper and started
sketching me. And I could see what was going on. I
didn't raise an eyebrow, I just let it go. And when
he left that day, he came to give me the picture. A
pretty good likeness of me. Very good. Did he sign
it? Yeah, he signed it, yeah. Okay. And he didn't
end up to be a famous artist? No, he didn't end up to
be a famous artist, no. What in general Did these
conferences with these students lead you to any
opinion about the Corps of Cadets' role at A&M? Oh,
that's a good question. I don't think I realized
when I took the job that the military interfaced as
pervasively as it did. But I remember also one of
the questions asked me when I was interviewing for
the job, the department head asked me, he says,
now, in your role as a reserve officer, you don't
intend to wear your uniform and come to the class
and lecture in your uniform, do you? I mean, the
fact that he could ask that question even
indicates that there was some attitude on the part
of faculty that they wondered about the military
business. But my military rank never entered into
anything that I ever did with students, except to,
as I said just a while ago, try to assure them that
the real Army was really not like the Cadet Corps
and any other military school. You go through a
phase there, and then you go out into a career
that's not exactly like that. Not that the
principles they teach, duty, honor, and what have
you like that, that's okay. I'm in favor of all of
that. This doesn't interfere with that at all.
Now, administratively, you were reporting to,
where did your unit fit administratively? It
really didn't have much of a home. Someday, when
you interview Austin Curley, you can talk to him
about where we fit in there. We were called the
Counseling and Testing Center. We had been,
shortly before I came, two or three years, it had
been a whole division. Indeed, they called it a
basic division, which is a group of college, and
they had a dean. So it still had a good deal of
academic clout, and that's the reason that all
counselors had faculty rank, because of the
holdover from the time when it was a basic
division.
There was no dean of instruction.
I think Dean Frank Hubert sort of informally was
our supervisor, so he was dean of arts and
sciences. Y'all were not part of... the Dean of
Students, Dean Hannigan's operation. No. Nor Mr.
Heaton's. Right. We're completely separate from
those. Did this lead you, as discussion began to
break out in the early 60s about whether or not the
Corps might be non-compulsory and women
admitted, did your experiences as a counselor
lead you to have any opinions about those matters?
No, not really.
I honestly can't say that I had any feeling
other than I truly believed in the volunteer
concept and the citizen army. I got that because I
went into the army as a private and went through
OCS. And having served as a private, and seen a lot
of citizen soldiers and citizen officers in five
years I was in the service. And I had seen that they
were every bit as good as the academic graduates,
in some cases better. And the fact that I just
didn't believe in a huge professional army. So in
that sense, I really believed in volunteerism,
being in the cadet corps. When I was a freshman at
Texas Tech, I was in the OTC. I immediately joined
because I felt I wanted to be a part of it.
So that's where I come from. I didn't think very
much about it being compulsory or
non-compulsory.
I just accepted that as part of A&M and I came. It is
and that's what I work with. Did you have, did you
come to have any feeling about it being, the
institution being all male? Yep. As a
psychologist, I could not see that as useful
for many reasons. But I thought co-education was
really the proper way to have an education. Did, as
you counseled with these young men, Was the corps
and of the all-male status, were those sometimes
part of their problems?
The fact that this was an all-male institution,
was that sometimes a problem, and that their girl
was a long way away, and or that they didn't want to
be in the corps? That's part of it, yes. I think, and
there wasn't as much transportation in those days
as there is now. Even in 61, not everybody had
wheels like they have today. And yeah, I felt that
that exchange was necessary for our healthy
psychological growth and personal development.
Let's talk about some of the key personalities
then. uh the dean hennigan uh generalize about him
dean hennigan came very near the same time i came as
i remember that and he was a of course a west pointer
and made points there but he thoroughly accepted
A&M and all of its traditions. And even when we went
through the transition to non-military,
he was supportive all the way through. Was he
supportive?
Dean Hannigan,
I didn't have too much contact with him at that time
because he was in the position of student life. And
as you see, we were academically oriented, so we
didn't have much to do with his office at all. All
right, what about a young man named Lloyd Heaton?
Lloyd Heaton, the registrar. We didn't have any
direct contact with him. Okay. Oh, I'm sorry. No.
Frank Hubert. Frank Hubert, of course, was the
Dean of Arts and Sciences eventually became five
different colleges but he was very sympathetic
with us because he had been a public school man and
he was hard as everything on us the first Christmas
we were here just before Christmas the counseling
and testing center sent out a communication to all
high school counselors in the state and we were
working pretty hard in those days we were working
at 50-hour week for sure, and we did supervise,
proofread a letter that went out to the whole
house. And he said, plain geometry, P-L-A-I-N.
So one of Dean Hubert's colleagues out in the
public groups immediately contacted him. So we
were on the carpet the day before Christmas, and we
spent Christmas rewriting that and writing an
apology to all high school students. And he didn't
have any direct supervision of us, but he said, we
can't afford to have this kind of image go out to the
high school counselors of A&M. It's bad enough
already. Now, I didn't know what he meant by bad
enough already, but I was soon to learn, I think,
that we didn't enjoy a good reputation among high
school students or their parents in the state at
the time. All right, the chief academic officer
then was Wayne Hall. The graduate dean. And did you
have any description you can offer about him?
Didn't have any contact with him. Okay. That fall,
first fall, they hired a dean of instruction and he
became our boss. Who was that? And his name was,
I'm blocked on it, I'll take it in just a minute. He
was in our church down there. Bill Graff? Bill
Graff. They hired him that fall and
we didn't even know he was coming until we saw an
article Eagle, Brian Eagle. Bill Graff was coming
as Dean of Instruction and we were placed under him
from then on and that ended Dean Hubert's informal
supervision of us. I think that's what happened.
Describe Dean Graff's manner or style. He was
uninformed about counseling and testing and not
be a professional military man, except for a very
short while. He had a surprisingly military
approach to most things.
But he was pretty authoritarian in his approach to
the whole campus. All right. Now, you and I then
worked for the same president for close to a
decade. Describe your impressions of Earl
Rudder. Well, what I just said about Bill Graff
using the unpleasant military aspects in his
relationship with people, I'd have to say the
exact opposite of Earl Rutter. I had a good deal of
personal contact with him even before I came
because I was in his army reserve unit. And so
although he was a general and I was a captain, still
you see and hear of him a lot for two weeks every
summer when we go to camp. So I knew him slightly and
then they appointed me to the faculty athletic
council about two or three years there. And as such
being on that with that body I had we dealt a lot with
Earl and him and other other schools. So I got to
know him there. I'll never forget. He called me
down before he approved my appointment to the
Athletic Council, which I hardly knew what it was.
They only took me on there because of my expertise
in test and measurements. And the Athletic
Council was charged with developing a formula
which would predict grade point ratio for
incoming athletes. And it had to be at least 1.6.
prediction before they could be recruited. Now is
that 1.6 as we now compute it?
Does that translate to 1.6 today? Yes, as it is
today. A&M being on a three-point system, it was a
.6. And so I had an interesting research project
that lasted for two, three years there, but before
he accepted me, he called me down to the office at
the system building. He said, Landy says, what do
you want to do this for? I said, well Chris
Gronemann took me on to consult on some things and I
went on a trip or two with him and if he wants me I'll
be glad to work with him any way I can. He said, okay.
So I was in, but then I was in his home several times
in that office, the other five or six members of the
Athletic Council, and we got to know him. They were
from West Texas, of course, and they even knew
Peggy's folks.
Sort of casual acquaintance, knew who they were
and stuff like that.
But yeah, I have nothing with the highest respect
for him, and he was not blood and guts kind of
military man at all. Describe him physically.
What size man was he? He was over six feet and he
weighed about 215, 20 pounds and he got to be
overweight for a while and he tried his best to play
golf and he would play and Marvin Tate would try to
get him out of the office. And invariably, he'd go
over there when they had a date to play golf and
something happened that he could not come.
Literally, I was a pretty close observer of his 10
years of service and his 10 years which undermined
his health, which eventually cost him his life,
because I could see him going down physically. And
he wasn't very old either. He got through his
retirement, he died shortly before his
retirement came into force. He was 59 years old.
One month before his 60th birthday. We all grieved
because he didn't get that. Could you see his
health declining? Oh yes, I think that was
visible. Not mentally, but physically he was...
softer and breathing hard and stuff like that.
Could you tell any difference in his work
schedule? No. He worked hard if not harder.
It was pretty hard on him adjustment wise. There
was a lot of opposition to him on the non-military
and the co-ed stuff. And there was one Board of
Regents meeting, which we were called to. And some
of the regents were late getting there and they
were all sitting around the table and the meeting
was held over in the meeting room in Svisa Dining
Hall. They didn't have a place on the campus, no
rudder tower or anything like that at the time. And
I never, of course, the Athletic Council was
sitting around the back side with a room like that
and your sort of supernumerary, but it was about
the eligibility of the 1.6 rule and all that sort of
stuff. They were there to tell them what was going
on. And while we're in this informal period there,
I'd have to say that the regents, in a good-natured
way, were harassing him about for education and
anything else. Student fees. Was this before it
had happened? No, it was afterwards. Oh,
afterwards. Afterwards. And one of the main
contentions there was, why can't we raise this
student service fee? And he didn't want to raise
it. And they were harassing him. But I say good
natured. There was a subtle undertone there, you
can't tell what it was going on. But he kept his
cool. He did not respond to their jibes and barbs at
him. And by the way, one day recently
I was talking to Margaret Rutter and told her of
this incident. And she was surprised. She said,
well I would have thought he had flared back at him
and shoot him out. He probably knew who the
commanding officers were. Yeah, he probably did.
Do you have any insight you can share about the
deliberations, discussion, steps toward
non-compulsory corps, admission of women? No, I
was not party to the detailed discussion. I didn't
get in on that at all. It was a sort of a surprise to me
as I look back on it and think about it now. My own
family almost disowned me when I came here because
I had two daughters and a wife who wanted to go to
school. And they thought they could not go to
school. But jobs were hard to find in those days.
You may know about that. Do you remember, what was
your first monthly salary here as you started? Do
you remember that one? Mine was $5.50. let's see, I
believe I was hired for about $8,000. So that'd be
$750. Yeah, something like that. Mine two years
earlier was $550 a month in the history
department. But you know, Haskell, what amazed me
is that position stayed open for a year. And nobody
would take it. And it was there for me the next year
when I came around and looked at it again. That says
to me that Not many people were looking at A&M as a
desirable place to come. You and I talked about
that before. Alright, can you share some examples
that you may know of of Mr. Rutter's leadership?
Something that he stood up for? Don't know
directly, except the one I observed there where he
defended the students not raising their
activities fee. That's the only one I know of right
now, directly.
Did you see him much around the campus? Not that
much. I saw him a lot more because I was on this
committee, more than an ordinary prof would see
him. In athletics, as far as you know, in that era,
who was calling the shots? Who was running it? The
council and the president.